---
layout: post
title: N3 Lesson 11
date: 2024-10-30 20:07 +0800
categories: ["Lessons", "N3"]
tags: [Sentences, Grammar, ]
---

## Sentence Pattern 99
```
(V, cut ます・N)	気味
```
The current situation feels a little like ~
There is a slight tendency to do

> Note: Has a negative meaning

Usually used with the following verbs:
* 太っている
* 痩せている
* 上がっている
* 下がっている
* 疲れている
* 遅れている

### Similar to SP96 っぽい
| っぽい | 気味 |
| -ish/looks/sounds like | a little bit of, a touch |
| Has positive uses | all negative |
| ~ feeling | ~ state |

#### For nouns
| っぽい | 気味 |
| 病気っぽい | 緊張気味 |
| 白っぽい | |
| 粉っぽい | |
| 大人っぽい | |
| 子どもっぽい | |


#### For verbs
| っぽい | 気味 |
| Immediately | A little ~ |
| Can be used on things | Only used on people |

## Sentence Pattern 100
```
Vて	なんか	いない
いAdjく	なんか	ない
なAdj・N	なんか	じゃない
```
Emphasize that ～ is not true

Uses SP90　なんか

```
Vて	なんか	いられない
```
Emphasize that you cannot do V

Uses Potential Form


## Sentence Pattern 101
```
N	particle	さえ	。。。
```


## Sentence Pattern 102
```
(Vる・Vない・いAdj・なAdj・N)		(くらい・ぐらい)
```
Same as ほど[fn], Metaphor/example of degree/level. くらい is casual and allows use with なAdj

“At the very least”, “The bare minimum that is expected”


## Sentence Pattern 103
```
(V, cut ます)	っぱなし
```
Not doing something you should be doing and leaving it as it is

The continuation of a problem in the same state, expressed complaint/disappointment

## Sentence Pattern 104
```
N	だらけ
```
A lot of undesirable things (mud, wrinkles, dirt, etc.) attached

Negative evaluation


## Sentence Pattern 105
```
Vた	りして
```
Gently/softly state that someone’s appearance is different from always

Gently give an instruction

Has a worried/anxious feeling to the listener

Do not confuse with SP34


## Sentence Pattern 106
```
N1	らしい		N2
N1	らしい
```
N characteristic/special feature is visible

Having typical characteristic of N

## Sentence Pattern 107
```
Plain かと思った
```
First thought had the wrong outcome, a misunderstanding

Not factual

I thought that… (but was wrong)

## Sentence Pattern 108
```
(N・Vる)	とか
```
Casual equivalent for や。。。など,～たり。。。たり

Used to list examples of similar actions/activities

## Sentence Pattern 109
```
(Vる・Vた・Nの)	ついでに~
```
When you take advantage of an action to do something else


## Sentence Pattern 110
```
Plain	に違いない
```
Absolutely sure about something

I’m sure that…

Usually used with きっと or 絶対 in the beginning of the SP


## Sentence Pattern 111
```

```


## Sentence Pattern 112
```

```


## Sentence Pattern 113
```
(Vて・いAdj, replace ending い with くて・なAdj, replace ending な with で)	しょうがない
```
Mentally/physically feels very ~

Can’t hold back the feeling of being desperately ~

In an unbearably ~

Expresses very strong desire

Usually used with 
* 寂しい
* 心細い
* 嫌な
* 心配な
* 不安な
* 可愛い
* 楽しい
* 腹が立つ
